And just check it's going. So I have to start saying I'm Marsha Mani and I'm here today at
Robertson. Robertson. Robert son. Pan Robert son and it is Thursday the 20th. 21st. Thursday the
21st of March 2019. Thank you, Pam. Robert son. 35th anniversary of my father dying. Yes. Oh really?
I'm just going to pop that there, Pam. Right. No, it's really helpful because this is going to
become an archive. Really helps if you could just give me your date of birth as well. So Pam,
can you tell me where are you born? In Cardiff. Yeah. Near Victoria Park. Yep. And I lived there
till my husband, well I went to Aberyst University for three years and then we got married and then
we lived in, I put the farm, flat-owned farm in Pennyland, not in Cardiff but Pennyland Baselake.
So you went to university you said? Yeah. Oh that was, so you were what in the 50s? 56. So was that
was that quite unusual then? I don't think so, no. No? What did you do at university? Agricultural
science followed by a postgraduate diploma in dairying. Okay. And it was in the dairy industry
then that I spent my working life. What were you doing? I was head of the laboratory. We had a big
milk processing plant here. I didn't know whether you knew that but um, no. Just you go to the end
of this lane turn right and there are new houses on your right. Yeah. And that's where the dairy
was, yes. And I was in charge of the laboratory. So was that the National Milk Marketing Board?
No, no, no, no. That was United Dairies. Okay. And then my claim to fame, if I have one,
is that I made the first yogurt to be sold commercially in South Wales. You did? Yeah.
Because I went up to the head laboratory in London when they were experimenting with this stuff that
had come, actually from Bulgaria it came and I thought it was horrible. Well I still think
it's horrible. I never touch yogurt now. And we made yogurt and then I came back to Marshfield and
we produced it there. And initially it was sold in Swansea, the first lot we made. The first lot
we made was 500 little of those third pint pots with a wide rim. And when I left there they were
doing 1500 a day. So yeah, that was where the yogurt came from originally. Here in Marshfields,
what year was this? 1961. That's incredible. And this was with, is it United Dairies?
Canberra and United Dairies that was, yes. Which is one of the outlets for United Dairies which
was the biggest then, the biggest company, milk company in the country. Yeah. So did you get a
claim at the time for doing that? No, just did as I was told. Oh we had some fun with that yogurt.
Anyway. What do you mean you had some fun with it? Because Muggins decided that if we could make
plain yogurt we could make strawberry yogurt. So I got strawberry syrup in and that was brown,
a horrible shade of brown. I used to call it calf shit brown.
And we got in lactose and we replaced the normal sugar with the lactose and this strawberry syrup
and it was horrible pale brown liquid. So I went to Tesco's which was in High Street in Newport
then and I bought up all the cochineal they had. And instead of adding it a drop at the time I
chucked the lot in and suddenly the colour of those candles was turned out like gold.
Chucking down the drain having got one of my staff to watch that the dairy man who didn't see me.
Start all over again, go to Tesco's for more cochineal but I'd already bought it all so they
didn't have it. Up to Aster, got that cochineal and then I did add it a drop at the time till I
got the right colour. We had some fun with that yogurt. Oh dear, dear, dear. It was heated
in a big vat. It was a double lined big vat with hot water running in between the layers to heat it
up. And I turned on the steam one day to heat it up, went to do something, forgot all about it
and when I came back there's all this yogurt all bubbling in. Chuck that away and start again.
The things we did with that yogurt was hilarious. So when it was launched, do you remember when it
was launched? That would have been it in 1961. It went first to Swansea and then I don't know when
the supermarkets picked it up because in those days it was either plain yogurt which was quite
a clean taste but sharp. And then of course the yogurt that they make now doesn't bear any
relation to that at all. And I've never eaten the stuff since because I've had such a time
tasting every flipping batch that I don't want yogurt anymore. Never have yogurt. The only time
I have it is if I'm actually giving it as a sweet. In fact I went to my friend and she had Tesco's
finest raspberry yogurt and it was gorgeous. And I've looked since and I can't find it in Tesco's
anywhere so I've given up on that. I think I can live without yogurt. That's quite something though
actually I think that you were the first, you created the first yogurt in Wales. South Wales.
Yeah I don't know about North Wales. In Marshfields. Yeah. So was it a big unit,
was a big factory here? Oh massive, yeah a really massive milk factory. Yeah. Mainly bottled milk
and we used to send 30,000 gallons a day to London in milk tankers you know from the railway.
We had a little tanker that went back and forward filling these big tankers for the railway.
What from Newport? It would go from Newport? From Marshfield the siding was here. Yeah. And then it
just got hooked up to a goods train or something and ended up in London. Oh my goodness. So where
did all the milk come? Where did it start off? Nowadays they collect milk in big tankers
but in those days they were in churns and it was pretty well the whole of Monmouthshire and part
of Glamorgan. How many farmers would it have been? Around about between 50 and 60 farmers
and the milk used to come in in churns and that was it. And then it went into the
bin it was pasteurised and bottled. Gosh. So how many people were working there? Oh crumbs I don't know.
I don't know. I had seven in the laboratory, three on the out.
Probably between 50 and 60. Yeah it would have been that's just a rough estimate because I've
really never thought about how many were there. Yeah. So when did it close? Right.
Oh it's certainly more than 10 years ago. I don't know. Let's just say within the last three years
within the last 20 years that sort of time and then they built all the big houses. So that would
have been lots of dairy farmers. All their milk would have gone there and it would have been
processed there and then either gone into milk bottles. That's it. Sent to London or made into
products. The milk was sent in tankers to London but it went into bottles and the company had
depots or you know where the driver would take all the bottled milk and from there it went to the
milkman who in those days delivered it which they don't anymore. Yeah that's just an example
of something that's gone. Yeah oh yes. Yeah you're right nobody well very few people I think get milk
delivered. Yeah I do actually. Do you? Yeah I insist on supporting at the end of my road there
is a dairy. Ah right. And I want to support it. Fair enough yeah. Like I can you know. Oh yes. So what sort of place was it
like to work in? I enjoyed it. It was fine yeah. I was my own boss. I had to add all the power in the
world. If I didn't like what was happening I could just stop it all stop the bottling dead and
get to the cause of whatever was you know was happening. We had a chap who was a troubleshooter
and we had a woman rang up to say that there was half a mouse in a bottle of milk.
So if that had got into the papers so we sent this chap along and we sent him with a massive
crate of tin peaches and tin this and tin that and tin the other to take this lady and his
instruction was that even if he had to kill her he had to bring that bottle back with the mountain
because we didn't want her calling the public out. It was a good thing she did call us first. Yeah.
And anyway he did get the bottle out. There's the back half of this mouse with a long oh god
it was disgusting. What had happened was it must have been in the bottle before it was washed
and the washing didn't get it out of the bottle and then it got filled up with milk and that's
what happened. Poor woman what a thing to find. I don't think I'd have been very happy. No. So
you would get hundreds of bottles thousands of bottles in every day. Yeah. So it was your job to
make sure everything was sterile and that's it and the chemical composition was right
and the bacterial composition was right. Yes. Yeah. We started at five in the morning and
went right through till about 10 at night in shifts. Yeah. Well the thing is I'm thinking
from my perspective that's quite a responsible position for a woman in the early 60s.
Yeah it was. Yes. Were you a bit of a trailblazer? Oh yeah. I never thought of myself as a trailblazer
but yeah we had one man in our office. He was a student and he was in fact the son of one of
the princes in one of the minor African countries and he was a student here and we were short of
staff. Two of us had left on maternity leave and the man said the only one I can offer you that's
got a reasonable brain is, can't even remember his name, but anyway this chap he was wonderful. He
was really really lovely. Really? And in the end nobody was bothering so you used a pipette after
him or anything. He was just a really nice bloke. You don't remember what country he was from? No
it was a minor African country and I yeah but um I can't remember. I would have known at the time
but I can't remember it now. Oh. Yep. So were you living in Marshfields when you were working?
No I was living in Wychurch and I had a Vespa scooter and I used to get back and
forward on that. Did you? I had a car first. Yeah. No hang on which did I have? I had the Vespa
scooter first then the car yes. A big old Austin Devon. How far is Wychurch from here?
Outskirts of Cardiff. Um six eight miles I suppose.
That's a lovely cup of tea thank you. Oh good. So were you married then when you were working?
I married in 1958 so it was in the middle of the yeah. So what did your husband think about you
working there? Oh he didn't worry. Didn't he? No. He had his tractor in his head cutter and he used
to go around oh first of all he used to start at five in the morning and drive a milk lorry just
for one delivery and then he'd finish about ten and then get on his tractor and cut hedges and
ploughed fields and all the rest of it. Really? So how long were you here for? Um 19 married in 63.
We lived then in a house um it's on the same level as this but towards the main road. Yeah.
To Nunant and we moved there from then 81 um up to the farm and then moved down here eight years ago.
Okay so um so you and your husband you spent some of your married life here in this area?
Yes we did yes quite a lot of it actually all our kids were born there yeah. Oh really? So what
in Marshfields? Not Marshfield, Coyde-Curnew which is the next village along. I must have
passed through that yeah. Yeah. How do you pronounce it again Pam? Coyde-Curnew. Coyde-Curnew.
Curnews wood so whoever is it whoever Curnew was. As you as you came from Newport I presume along
the 848 yeah um you probably wouldn't notice but just before you get to Castleton um there's a car
car place on your left hand side selling cars. Yeah. That then was the garage where I worked.
Really? Yeah. After the dairy? Yeah. So you were at the dairy so that must have been quite a big
employer for the area was it? Yes but then I had my children so um and then by then we had um
we had 14 JCBs then my we kept adding JCBs um to do the work so I then was sort of full time
in the office and with the kids. Okay. Doing the invoicing and whatnot. And that was at Coyde-Curnew?
Yeah that was yes. So what was it I mean imagine the place has been developed massively over the
last 20 30 years what was it like when you you first married and your children were young?
It's not much has happened in Newport where it's Cardiff that's done the expansion
and Newport's pretty well stayed the same but Cardiff have come right to the boundaries of
them between them and Newport. Yeah. And every time you go out there's more houses being built
there are a lot from you know now toward it all used to be green fields going to Cardiff but now
of course it's all houses. It's all been developed? Yeah. So when your children were young did you have
places to play in the fields and? Well this was it we we had um we lived right at the end of a lane
that only ended in our house so the kids could run wild in the fields which they did. Yeah. Yeah.
And then they they rigged up a swing with just a bar of wood that they sat on and from one of our
trees and they they made their own fun they were and um they will all say now that they they had a
marvelous childhood because they were so free when they went to school I had to teach them road sense
because they'd never had it because we get in a car in you know it's at the house and drive somewhere
and they I had to teach them you know look right look left look right again and then walk across
the road. Really? Because they didn't and my daughter nearly got killed oh boy I went to meet
her from school and I was coming down the road and the school's the other side of the road she
was on the pavement she saw my van and she just shot out right in front of this woman in a in a
modest minor and she jammed on the base and she actually did touch Dawn but that was Dawn's fault
because Dawn sort of staggered and I thought she's going to be killed because I could see
this car coming up but uh awful thing but she survived. Oh my goodness. Yeah. Did you have
reams on your land then? Reams? Reams? You know were the water channels?
Yeah. The ditches yeah yeah. Did you have to maintain those? Uh no no we didn't we had to um
we had a stream that ran past our house but it was um so really no the reams were down here and
the stream ran into it yes no we didn't have to do any of that. So your husband had um or you both
had a JCB business? Yeah. Did you? Yeah. So and you've built that up over several years? Yes and the
last big job we worked on was the Bute Town tunnels in Cardiff we had six JCBs on that right from the
time it started till the time it finished. So when would that have been Pam? Oh hang on let me think
let me think the 1990s Martin died in 98 it was before that in the 1980s I suppose and the start
of the 1990s yeah yeah yeah. That would have kept him busy for some time. Oh yeah yeah it was it was
a long job that one yes yeah yeah there were six JCBs on that all the time yeah. So he did work
he must have done work on other developments in oh yeah yeah all over the place yes yeah. So what
sort of stories did he have or did he come back and tell you you're telling me nothing really about
the boat? Oh that one when he went through the boat uh yeah that was before the JCBs either when we
were I think we were married then we're only just and he worked for a drainage board and I don't know
whether you know the Six Bells pub in Peterson yeah and he passed there where the Rheene was
he dug through and it was like a canoe um and he dug right through it and the archaeologist came he
told his boss near archaeologists came out and had a look and decided it was very very old and they
wanted to get it right out but the owner of the farm wouldn't let them dig it out so I presume
it's still there. Wow! Yeah so yeah but how old it was they really didn't know but it was very
very old yeah gosh it must have been really to be you know when it was yes yeah so your husband
worked for the drainage board yeah before we before we started out on our own yeah yeah so what sort
of jobs was he doing then? Oh he had a big excavator um and virtually just cleaning out the
all the between Cardiff and Newport and Newport and Chefstow and just cleaning out the the ditches
so the Rheene's. So this would have been what the late 50s? Yes that would have been yeah. So there
would have been quite basic machines then? Oh yeah yeah he rode a motorbike to work and his
his excavator it wasn't his it was what he worked for um that was parked the other side of Newport
every night and so he used to go across the you know Newport's transporter bridge he used to go
with his motorbike across there. Really? Yeah um that well that was being open very early in the
morning and in those days that's what it did was carry workmen but of course now it's just a tourist
attraction yeah. Oh god so he went across there on his motorbike? Yeah yep he rode his motorbike
everywhere and when he wasn't riding as I was. You really? Oh yeah. With a helmet or a headscarf?
Helmet always a helmet yes always a white moon of the black peak I can even remember
picturing it now yeah. Oh my god. Yeah yeah. So did do do you know the levels well then? I mean do
you call it the levels or the moors? Both. Both? I would I would probably call it the moors I don't
know much about the other side of Newport but I do know this end. Yeah yeah. So what other things do
you know about this end that might um people use? Has anyone ever told you about the balaclava pub?
No. No? If you go up the Marshfield road and you've got um a right hand bend before that bend there
was a pub called the balaclava and it was run by Ansells the brewers and behind the balaclava was a
big um distribution depot of Ansells and um then eventually got demolished um
we all went there one Christmas Eve from the dairy we went there lunchtime we got plastered
all of us and we came back down to the dairy and up in the laboratory we had one of the directors
Mr Rainer with us and he went into the laboratory and he just laid flat on the floor and he had
silby hat and he just put it on his face like this and went fast asleep and the whole the afternoon
we had to step over him it was hilarious oh dear dear dear it was so funny yeah that was in the
balaclava i can't remember when it got demolished quite a long time ago what about church did you
go to church here or where did you i didn't go to church here i go to church in do you know the
cat marbly pub no um it's the other side of the main road anyway in the village called michelson
and i go to st michael's yeah yeah and i also joined the baptists and we don't have a service
on a Sunday evening so i usually join the baptist for their service because they're just in you know
marshfield so are there any traditions or stories that are associated with this area um because
somebody told me something could go at roping so at the wedding you'd have a rope across the entrance
oh i didn't know that yeah yeah i didn't know that um this lane was called market road in that
those days and if you go along this lane not far past here on the left hand side there's a derelict
building all with um sheets of um tin and whatnot and that was the market the cattle market before
they moved to newport really yeah yeah when was this um when i was working in the day so in the
1950s so you remember market day here yeah yeah well what was that like it must have been very
traffic everywhere yes it was and um yeah i remember the market being here and then of course they
moved to newport and then very recently they're called well one last i don't know
10 years i suppose um the cattle market closed and they've got a big answer there now yeah yeah
so the big one there's one that raglan now isn't it yeah yeah that's where um the the business from
newport market moved to raglan yeah so so so there's a sidings here yeah so would cattle
and livestock come on no no no they'd only come um come in trailers or horse boxes no so it was
it was only the milk that ever went from here so what sort of livestock came to market do you
remember oh cattle and sheep yep lots of cattle lots of sheep yeah do you remember the auction
ring was there an auction ring or they're just pens i didn't in that time have any i worked
with the dairy in that time and i didn't have any animals of my own so i really wasn't interested
and then of course when it moved to newport and then we used to sell our lambs through through
there and um yeah um and bought the odd ram or the odd you or whatever so i came i came along this
yeah yeah so um so there is um there is like a big old barn there that's it
and that was that was a cattle market yes market yeah if you have an aerial photo on from google
earth you can see the marks where the pens were outside it oh gosh you can't from the ground
level but um one of my neighbors uh googled it and you it was amazing really prominent you could see
where the where the pens used to stand so was it all outside yeah apart from in apart from the
auction ring which was undercover yeah so on was market day one day a week or several days no one
day a week yeah do you remember what day um i don't remember it would probably been the same here
as it was in newport in newport it was wednesday so i would imagine it was probably wednesday here
so was it difficult to move for traffic and people and buses well it didn't um it didn't
affect me because i was in work before and i went to went home after the the livestock um and a lot
used to come from the what we call the low road so they were to come over the over the bridge and
you know before they got here and turned down the lane yeah yeah yeah oh that's so that's called
market lane colloquially it was yeah it isn't now everyone calls it team our lane but i always
knew it as market road really yeah that's fascinating when it got called team our i
haven't a clue not a clue any other places have got names at the local that are no i don't think
so the we in marshfield the first place you come to now is um pentune terrace and that was built
for the dairy workers when they first opened the dairy yeah and then we get to merrishfield
close again for dairy workers yeah yeah so when did the dairy open then i don't know i really don't
know um all i know was when i joined it the woman who was in charge of the lab before me had been
there 14 years so it would have been back into the 1940s and probably beyond then i really don't know
so it was a quite a you know big business oh it was big yes yes it was big yeah so did most people
who were there did they come locally or did they come further afield most of them were local yes
and when we had snow i had land rover tires on the back of my car and it was my job to go down
and around the out outline buildings and bring the workers into work because mine was the only
vehicle that would go down there really yeah yeah that was the big snow in 1963 62 63 yeah
you even had snow here then oh crumbs yes we didn't have snow here yeah because it doesn't
i was told it it's very not very often you'll get snow no we had no snow this year and i don't think
we had any last year um but then the snow was packed on the main road on the a48 till march
and it was just packed snow that we were driving on all the time yeah yeah so what was it like
down here at marsh fields um much the same as the main road because it's you have quite heavy
traffic down here um but when you got down to the bottom there weren't many vehicles that could go
along the bottom road because that was pretty bad but my old car could do it she chugs through
anything yep trust so it so you had the dairy and you had the cattle market one time so was
there a finished shop and thing like that then yes we had we had the shop the same shop as in
marshfield now okay and it's been altered and extended and whatnot and it's a very good shop
yeah you could live out of that shop apart from fresh veg they keep potatoes in but no other
fresh veg yeah but other than they've got a pharmacy the pharmacy and the post office in general
yeah oh yeah what about um flooding have you ever had flooding here flooding uh not here but when
we lived at tinnen ant as i say coy curnew when they built the motorway um 1966 they put all the
drainage from the construction into the stream that ran past our house and our house if you can
imagine our house was there and the stream used to come right around our house and in 1975 it was
they it had rained so much that the stream couldn't take it so instead of going around
our house it came straight through our house and we were flooded up to about the depth of other
not over our wellington about that much and the house would like that for oh crumbs probably a
week so what happened fortunately we we built we bought this old cottage and um converted it
ourselves and built on the kitchen and bathroom and my husband had had the the electric plugs
put at waist high instead of down so we were okay for electric you see because there's nothing
below that always we were we were wearing wellingtons in the in the house and then when
we went to bed you there's this rural wellingtons halfway up the stairs it was horrible it was
absolutely awful yeah did you get compensation um our house was insured and the contents and
everything fortunately with the company that my father worked for um and so we did we got the price
of a new carpet and what we actually did was had our carpet um uh hung up and and dried and put back
down again we steam cleaned it you know while it was hung up um and we had but we had the price of
a new carpet so we did quite well out of it actually and um the price of the furniture as well
which we simply dried and kept on using and so we we did make quite a couple of bobbies
i can't remember how much but it was but the motorway constructors they didn't say oh no no no no no
they didn't want to know so you remember the area before the motorway went in yep what was it like
like it is now except for the motorway yeah it was just um i had some friends whose house
had to be demolished you know right in the path of it yeah yeah and we worked on that with the
jcbs for quite a long time yeah so so you had some friends whose house was um compulsory purchase
yeah so what was that like for them was it difficult i don't remember i know that they had to move and
they did move and i think the compensation they had was good um but i don't really remember much
about it except that their house was bang slap in them in the way yeah so was there any opposition
to the motorway going through i don't remember there being any opposition they may well have
been but i really don't think there was so your husband or your company worked on the motorway
yeah really yeah yes i can claim to have driven my car the wrong way on the motorway because i
i used to uh deliver fuel to them and whatnot on and pick up truck and then of course there's
no traffic anyway so i so i've actually driven the wrong way down the m4 that's amazing yeah what
stretch um beyond cardiff and back then beyond newport through the tunnels i think back to the
cauldron in the next junction back god how long was your were you working on it for then
i mean i imagine there were lots of other oh yes yes and lots of others um oh crammed i don't know
probably about two years yeah massive job yeah it was it was massive yeah did they find anything
when they were doing the motorway don't think so no i don't think so if they did i didn't hear about
it so you were up there before it even opened oh yeah it was your job to deliver fuel yep
yeah that wasn't that was my thursday job no it wasn't that was my tuesday job yeah go around all
the sites collect all the time sheets from the drivers give them fuel on hydraulic oil if they
needed it carries a couple of spare wheels as well in case they needed it and that was my tuesday
job and my thursday job was to work out the wages and then friday deliver all the wages around the
sites along the motorway along well along everywhere up as far as brinmower all over the place wherever
they were working so presumably that was cash in little brown envelopes yes but but properly done
you know not not um uh cash in an envelope but proper wage slips it was all it was all correct
yes yeah everything was in a little brown envelope yeah with your wage slip in that's it but you
wouldn't get that ever now i don't suppose you would i don't know the last time i was ever paid
in cash for anything yeah you know you know with a with a wage slip yep so so you would have had to
go to a bank and get all the money out yes yes i drew the money out friday morning and took the
wages out friday afternoon no thursday afternoon i drew the money from the bank and then did the
wages early friday friday morning and because it was all done manually then you had the national
insurance tables and whatnot um and then set off around the site and deliver it so to get onto the
motorway before it was open did you have to have a special pass or anything like that no no there
empty entrances to the motorway you know when about every road junction you could have got on
or off the motorway so was it did he help make the tunnels the yeah oh yes we worked on the
bring grass tunnels yes and the boot town tunnels in cardiff yes crazy yeah so the insurance for the
boot town tunnels i am told but i i can't see that anyone would have made it up the insurance
the insurance premium allowed for 10 men to be killed on that project my god and my husband saw
one man killed he jumped on a dumper um what they did they cast the roof of the tunnel first
and then everything was down through holes in in the in the tunnel and they were big wide holes
you know half the size of this room and this man jumped on a dumper because it was in his way
it wasn't his dumper and the throttle stuck open and he went straight down the hole and was killed
the dumper turned over halfway down and squashed him they think if it had gone down solidly might
have lived and it was awful because he had second children really really tragic that was yeah
very tragic and my husband saw that happen it really upset him yeah gosh it upset him yeah
ah yep so did were there um was it mostly local people who were working on the diggers or did you
have irish or oh no no they were all pretty local yeah yeah yeah either from here or from up the
valleys we had a couple of drivers from pont de priz and and but mainly you know local yeah
were you involved in the um the lamb worm construction no not at all no
the only thing i remember land weren't were they had hundreds of lorries delivering shelter
and i was on my vespa scooter coming along the a48 towards cardiff of my vespa and one lorry was
in front of me and one lorry was right on behind me and one was there on my outside and they were
playing with me they and they did they scared a lot of me because they were so close and
before you get to the roundabout towards cardiff there's a turning left a little lane and i shot
down there but they really scared me and they were they were in game with me really but if i'd stopped
or swerved or anything i wouldn't be here now oh so i i went i shot off down the lane and then
they went on but it scared me really scared me because you're so vulnerable aren't you oh yes
yes yeah yeah what about um they're going to do an extension well they want to do an extension
of the m4 don't they yeah yeah i mean do you have any fears about that none at all simply because i
i'd be dead long before they get around to doing it so no they can do what they like
but do you ever visit the other part of the levels do you ever visit the levels on the other side of
the estuary no no i never have no but uh yeah what about newport then the dogs do you remember
anything any of that no not much it didn't affect me at all no um
i i've been down and the there was um an engineering firm called archway engineering
and if we made if we broke any bits of the diggers they could always repair it for us it was
what about did you was your husband or your business ever involved in making the seawall
oh yes before we got married um martin worked for the drainage board and um he did a lot of the
hiring the seawall and then with massive stones and then covering it in soil and grass and whatnot
yes yeah he did a lot of that yes because he's owned that seawall between me and between us
and getting flooded up to there i know it's quite a thought isn't it yeah we're below sea level here
yeah what about um uh do you ever think about that being below sea level or do you just
live with it don't ever think about it no what about um did did you or your husband ever go fishing
oh my husband fished yes he fished on the on the river y um up beyond usk
really yeah he salmon fished for salmon yeah yeah oh he loved fishing and i like an idiot
went with him one day he said why don't you come and i sat on that bank for hours and hours and
hours oh no i only did it once i never did it again so no fishing off the seawall or into the
reeds um they do fish from the seawall i believe um yeah apparently they have caught cod and
quite big fish off the seawall but i don't know who does it and um they also fish along this lane
oh really there's a massive fish in this rain and he's been caught hundreds of times
and he's about like that apparently i've never seen him i only know what people are saying
and he's a massive fish and every time they catch him of course they throw him back and he's been
caught it seems that he enjoys being caught and then having the hook taken out his mouth and
chucked back in yes what's this ring called do you know no i don't um the one going down on down the
marshfield road is the broadway okay um but i don't know what this one is i don't think it's
got a lane a name yeah so they chuck the fish back in yeah yeah oh yes yeah i think he's a pike
he's not um he's not a neatable fish anyway yeah no what about the seven bridge did we ever involved
in that uh we were involved in building the second seven bridge yeah yeah um on this side
of the river but doing the the just the ground work for the new preparatory for building the
bridge yeah i've worked there for quite a long time yeah did they find anything there no
not as far as i know no unless they didn't didn't tell me so that was that's relatively recently
isn't it um yes because the old seven ridge was 1966 correct me because that was the year my
elder son was born yeah um so that was 1966 i don't know when they did this one um
probably the 1980s ish i don't know i don't either i would say 90s you could well be right the 90s
yes 90s yeah definitely 90s early 2000s maybe yeah we don't think of it as being new anymore
which we did in those days yes yeah yeah how long were they working on the bridge for then
well you know not not terribly long um it was a preparatory work to you know going over the
actual water yeah and um there's if you you go up approach to the bridge now on the left hand side
across the stretch of water is um a timber yard and i went there once i had to deliver something
there but i stopped it was fascinating that they were floating a section of the bridge down
the river and i stopped and what i couldn't say there all the time because of course it wasn't
a very fast operation they had yeah and i'd love to have seen them hoisted up into place but i
didn't have the time yeah that would be a concrete cliff yes yeah that's incredible it was incredible
they lifted it up and yeah and then of course they tarmacked over it um it was only sort of
the framework of the bridge they did they've tarmacked it once it was in place and they made
those in chapstow the the bits for the bridge yeah oh did they yeah i didn't know that and um
one of the you know we used to have a ferry across the river then yeah one of the ferries is i can't
remember which one my son did tell me because he saw it they're restoring one of the ferries
in chapstow are they yep i didn't know that either um and he he saw it anyway yeah and he
said they were well on with them so i presume they'll just have it at the museum i suppose
oh that'd be interesting to find yeah it would did you ever go on it no oh we went on it yeah
when we when it was operational across the air oh yes what was that like it was okay but it
depended on the tide and sometimes you'd wait four hours for the tide to be high enough to
really yeah and then we on my vespa scooter we did a we went on holiday down to Bournemouth and
that sort of area and when we came back when they went to put it on the ferry it skidded off the
ferry into the water glory me what your scooter my scooter yeah so everyone grabbed it and got it
back on and i was terrified that the engine wouldn't work because it had been under water but
when we got the other side thank goodness it was okay but we nearly lost it we really nearly lost
it i was lucky yeah the back we just skidded off there's quite a lot of mud on the ramp yeah
and he's got him and and we were driving and my husband was standing alongside it driving it up
onto the thing and the back we did shit into the water oh boy happy days i've forgotten about that
see when i see pictures of it it looks completely open
what did you do when it was crossing was there somewhere you could sit inside
no no no no no you just stayed in your car but you had a motorbike well you stayed with your motorbike
fair enough you couldn't get in a motorbike i appreciate that we just stood there until
we got the other side only a couple of minutes and so it was because it looks very um oh it didn't
take long precarious um precarious would probably write but it was the way everybody crossed was on
the ferry yeah unless you want to go all up around cluster and come down again yeah yeah so we used
to yeah yes and then of course oh there's many a time that um we were in the queue to go on the
ferry and there'd be only a couple of cars in front of us and by then the level of the water
would have dropped too much we had to sit there for four hours oh yeah and we did that a couple
of times sat for four hours oh i mean was there somewhere to have a cup of tea or an ice no no no
the other side there was yeah there was a cafe there and um and sort of a a shop as well yeah
and you could get a drink there and buy spice sweets and whatnot but not this side only the
other side yeah so just where exactly was the ferry where did it come in was it by it was where
at brook yeah it was under the old seven bridge okay okay the it was just a couple of yards either
side of the old seven bridge the ramp up yeah yeah do you remember when the first bridge opened
uh i remember it's 1966 and it was because i was expecting um hayden then and it was about
april time he was born in december but it was i was just expecting him when it came when it opened
that was the old one the new one i can't remember when it opened yeah now they've taken the tolls
away i know it's fantastic yeah it didn't affect me because i got a blue badge anyway but um
so i didn't have to pay to cross the bridge anyway but you don't have to wait at the cold
deep booth oh we had to wait at the toll booth until you show show the badge and they took the
particulars and then let you go but now of course there's no no tolls at all now you've got a lot of
stories pan haven't you i thought i just i never thought i never thought of that i i really didn't
know it's an interesting perspective though you know yeah the diggers and the yeah the big
infrastructure projects you're involved oh yeah and then um there's a big building in newport road
in cardiff um head and house and we did all the foundations for that and because it was such a big
building it had a very deep foundations yeah and we had to um dig ourselves onto a platform where
the digger could stand and then dig down a bit further and stand on that platform until we were
right at the the level where they wanted the the foundations to be why yeah gosh yep yes did you
ever operate a digger yourself a digger yeah only around the yard in you know when not not out on
site ever but if i could drive them around the yard if they wanted to move from here to there sort
of thing yeah yeah yeah so there are any other stories you'd like to add i can't think of any
characters you met or no no our mp paul flin has died recently and um i was involved with him um
um on we had a yard building a yard down the bottom and when we moved out of there
the people who took it on rented it um but not from us from we rented it and they rented after
and they wanted to do something i can't even remember what it was but it was against the
planning laws anyway and i had to go to a meeting with paul flin and a lot of other interested
people and say my piece and that was it and a couple of years later there was something going
on and there were plans of it in the village hall just going down from castleton just as on the bend
that's the the village hall and um and as i said it was a couple of years later and i was very
impressed because when i went in paul flin was there but i didn't know he was until i got in
and the first he said oh mrs robertson how are you and i was amazed with all the people that he
met that he knew my name or remembered my name that's a good politician isn't it yeah a very
very good politician yes yeah yeah he was great and um my friend who is an accountant um she's
just got a small business doing farmers accounts and whatnot and um one of her clients had two
polish workers and they were going home the next day but when they had come into the country
they'd had to give in their passports to the home office and they had all their tickets to go the
next day and the home office couldn't find the passport so um my friend jennifer what am i going
to do for him and i said well why don't you ring paul flin see if he can help so she said
we all need help with that i said well try him so she rang and spoke to his um secretary which was
a man and within two hours the passports came by courier to her house wow well that's impressive
yeah yeah that is impressive he was a very very good good mp he'd be sorely missed i think he was
84 i think oh gosh yeah yeah he really was he was older than me but not a lot older he wasn't
sitting in office though he wasn't sitting in office he was yes until he died yes why but he
wasn't going to stand at the next election but we never got there not yet we haven't anyway
with all this brexit nonsense oh gosh have you got any photographs of your dairy days no none at all
no no no no no we were never much of a family for taking photographs
i have a lovely one of my pony but on that's all
i must be mad because this photograph is she was a very fiery pony out across west mountain she
really was very feisty and i it's over there i'll show you before you go yeah she's standing in the
middle of the road with no one holding her yeah outside my parents house oh and i don't know how
we could be nuts enough to leave her standing on her own because she was quite capable whipping
around on her hind legs and galloping off up the street really yeah i don't remember ever taking
the photograph um but i had a big birthday party uh last year yeah and my friend who i used to ride
with when we were kids she had this photograph of her that she gave me it was absolutely super so
you're a rider then you yeah yeah had horses all my life i've still got one now but it's out on
permanent loan yeah yeah so where did you ride everywhere around the country lanes here
there wasn't as much traffic on the roads then as there is now of course yep yeah dona and i had a
um a Welsh cob between us called of all things called lucky what a stupid name to give the horse
but uh yeah we we rode a lot don't ride a lot and yeah do just have fun riding yeah would you ever
jump over the reeds on the horse and no no i didn't fancy getting wet
yeah although i did get very wet once i um oh when i was a teenager i kept my pony out at
sun faggans yeah um where the museum is now yeah and uh and one day i was riding a bareback
and um uh one day she she took off for the riverbank and under of it she stopped in two
bang bang and i went clean overhead into the water
and then she came into the water and got out on the bank the other side do you think i could
get her to come back through the river no she so me soaking wet bareback just a bridle on her
had to get on and ride her right round um the outskirts of cardiff to come back down the other
side of the river back to the first river bridge she wouldn't go back through the water
oh we had some fun mind we really did she was a marvelous pony and then she was killed on the
marshfield road i'd had her 15 years and we went to my niece's christening on a sunday afternoon
and while we were there she was in the field from the back of marshfield someone had let
her out of the field and car had hit her and broken her leg oh and it was oh i was
devastated i mean i loved it a bit it was it was horrible absolutely horrible
there we are all in the past that was absolutely amazing i'm just going to switch this off
right that's nearly an hour that's amazing good lord yes it is